Indexing creates data structures
that improve the speed of data
retrieval operations in a
database.
In combination with sharding and
partitioning, proper indexing
allows for efficient data
organization and fast data
retrieval, crucial for effective
time series data analysis.
To enable efficient aggregation,
grouping and search over
billions of rows, CrateDB
combines multiple approaches.
By default, all attributes are
indexed based on their respective
active data types.
This releases a lot of burden
from the operations team to
figure out an optimal indexing
strategy that might need to be
changed over time to ensure a
high query performance for ad
hoc queries.
That means queries that might
not have been anticipated when
designing the indexing strategy.
Memory mapped columnar storage
allows for fast aggregations
over huge amounts of data due to
better leverage of existing
hardware and automatic
optimization for data that is
accessed very frequently.
Numeric values leverage blocked
KD trees which is an IO-
efficient dynamic search tree.
Textual data leverages and
inverted index and full text
indexes can be created on
demand.
Vectors leverage and
hierarchical navigable small
world index for efficient
approximate nearest neighbor
search using an Euclidean
distance as default similarity
measure.
We will dig into more details on
the following slides.
CrateDB uses columnar storage
which stores data table columns
separately as opposed to row
based storage which stores
entire rows together.
This arrangement offers several
advantages for time series data.
Efficient data scanning:
Queries, aggregations and sort
operations that access only a
subset of table columns, which
is common in analytics, can scan
the data more efficiently
because only the relevant
columns are read from storage.
Better compression: Since each
column typically contains
similar data types.
Columnar storage can apply more
effective compression
techniques, reducing storage
costs and improving IO
efficiency.
Improved memory handling: CrateDB
uses memory mapped columnar
storage files which enables very
fast reads for frequently
accessed columns as they can be
delivered from memory.
Data from disk can be read and
made available for processing
very fast for less frequently
accessed data.
In our example, the columnar
store maps the value of record
IDs to the temperature recorded
at each weather station with
dock values.
When a query requires
aggregation such as calculating
the average temperature, CrateDB
will directly access the
temperature columns values.
This direct access path
significantly speeds up query
execution.
This approach is highly
beneficial for time series data
where data sets are often vast
and queries frequently involve
aggregations over time
intervals.
The combination of fast range
scans, as we will outline on the
next slide, makes this approach
very fast, even when combined
with additional filter criteria.
CrateDB employs so-called block
KD trees, which are a special
version of binary search trees
to enhance the indexing of
numerical values such as time
stamps, IP addresses, geospatial
data, and of course, measurement
values.
The way how the data structure
is designed ensures high query
performance by dividing the
search space in half at each
step.
They offer logarithmic search
time complexity, especially for
filtering and range queries,
which are very common in time
series analytics, for example
when selecting a certain range
of time stamps, slicing by
device IDs, or filtering for
certain measurement values.
When dealing with geospatial
data, which is inherently
multidimensional, the importance
of block KD trees becomes even
more pronounced to handle
complex queries across longitude
and latitude, as well as
different levels of geospatial
granularity.
In addition, BKD trees are
especially good at indexing data
that is stored on disks.
For range queries and partial
match queries, BKD trees help in
quickly identifying the relevant
disk blocks without scanning
unrelated data.
Furthermore, they partition data
in such a way that related data
points are stored close to each
other on the disk.
This spatial locality minimizes
the number of disk pages that
need to be read as more relevant
data is loaded with fewer IO
operations.
BKD trees remain efficient for
high volume and bulk loading
operations, which is critical
for time series data where large
volumes of data are inserted and
kept in the database, which
means the index constantly grows
over time.
In CrateDB, an inverted index
is a data structure that maps
the content to its location in a
table or a document.
The plain index is used for
exact matching.
It's straightforward and fast
for queries that know the exact
phrases they are looking for.
In our case, we have an index
that maps each weather station
to an ID such as Berlin West to ID
1, Berlin South to ID 2, and
Zurich South to ID 3.
This type of index is ideal for
direct and unambiguous lookups.
On the other hand, the full text
index supports more complex
search operations, allowing for
searches within the text for
partial matches and variations.
In the full text index
example, the weather station
column has been indexed to
identify the occurrence of terms
across different stations.
For instance, the term Berlin is
associated with IDs 1 and 2,
which correspond to Berlin West
and Berlin South respectively.
Similarly, South is linked to IDs
2 and 3, West to ID 2, and
Zurich to ID 3.
This enables users to search for
a term like Berlin and find all
related stations in the city of
Berlin, regardless of their
exact names.
Full text search, which goes
beyond simple pattern matching,
is possible by creating full
text indices which can also be
composite index allowing the
indexing of multiple text
columns together.
The example demonstrates how to
create a table with a composite
full text index on the name and
description columns and then use
that index to perform a search.
Using custom analyzers we can
refine the text tokenization
process to different languages
or specialized requirements.
In our example, we've used a
standard analyzer tailored to
the English language.
Following the tables creation,
we perform a full text search
where the term key station is
used to query the stations
table.
We want to identify important
weather stations for which we
can find a text like Key station
in the name or description
field.
The output is sorted by a
relevant score which assesses
the degree to which each entry
matches the search term.
Notably, Berlin West ranks higher
than Berlin South, indicating a
stronger association with the
phrase key station.
As per the full text searches
analysis, we can see the
difference in the description
attribute.
Both of them contains the term
station, but only Berlin West is
called a key weather station.
CrateDB uses standard SQL,
making it easier to integrate
full text search with other
types of filters and query
criteria, and it can execute a
variety of full text searches.
Fuzzy searches allow for a
margin of error, accommodating
slight misspellings or
variations in the search terms.
Phrase searches target exact
sequences of words, and
attribute boosting prioritizes
certain text over others,
enhancing the relevance of
search results.
With the presented set of
indexes, CrateDB can
efficiently support advanced
time series use cases, from
filtering and slicing the data
to advanced full text and
geospatial searches.